A Plotto Masterplot consists of three clauses: An "A" Clause, 
a "B" Clause and a "C" Clause. 

The A Clause is the Protagonist Clause. 

The B Clause originates and carries on the action. 

The C Clause carries on and terminates the action. 

Any A Clause may be used in conjunction with any B Clause 
and with any C Clause. For the purpose of bringing all the B 
Clauses in juxtaposition with all the A and C Clauses, it is merely 
necessary to turn the narrow page. 

Suggestions for evolving a plot to the pattern of the Masterplot 
selected will be found in the Plotto Conflicts. The Conflicts are 
listed in sub-groups; and each sub-group is listed under the full 
text of the B Clause which the sub-group exemplifies. 

On the page immediately following the Masterplot pages will 
be found an index of the respective Conflict sub-groups under the 
parentheses number of the B Clause. 

The C, or Terminal, Clauses are also numbered in parentheses; 
and Conflicts suggesting these terminations will be found opposite 
the C Clause numbers in the Classification by Symbols. 



12 



Plotto Chart: Master plots with 



Interchangeable Clauses 



'A" Clauses 

1. A Person in Love, 

2. A Married Person, 

3. A Lawless Person, 

4. An Erring Person, 

5. A Benevolent Person, 

6. A Protecting Person, 

7. A Person of Ideals, 



9. A Person Subjected to Adverse Con- 
ditions, 

10. A Resentful Person, 

11. A Person Swayed by Pretense, 

12. A Subtle Person, 

13. A Person Influenced by the Occult 
and the Mysterious, 

14. A Normal Person, 

15. Any Person, 



(1) Engaging in a difficult enterprise when 
promised a reward for high achievement, 

(2) Falling in love at a time when certain 
obligations forbid love, 

(3) Seeking to demonstrate the power of 
love by a test of courage. 

(4) Being impelled by inordinate fancy to 
exercise mistaken judgment in a love 
affair 

(5) Becoming involved in a hopeless love 
affair, and seeking t9 make the best of a 
disheartening situation, 

(6) Challenging, in a quest of love, the re- 
lentless truth that "East is East, and 
West is West, and never the twain shall 
meet," 

(11) Confronting a situation in which courage 
and'devotion alone can save the fortunes 
of one beloved, 

(15) Finding a sustaining power in misfortune, 

(16) Being delivered from misfortune by one 
who, in confidence, confesses a secret of 
transgression, 

(22) "Following a wrong course through mis- 
taken judgment, 

(26) Seeking secretly to preserve another 
from danger, 

(29) Aiding another to hide from the world 
a fateful secret, 

(33) Resisting secretly and from an honor- 
able motive a mandate considered dis- 
creditable, 

(34) Embarking upon an enterprise of in- 
surrection in the hope of ameliorating 
certain evil conditions, 

(40) Embarking upon an enterprise in which 
one obligation is opposed by another 
obligation. 

(44) Seeking by unusual methods to conquer 
personal limitations, 

(48) Assuming the character of a criminal in 
a perfectly honest enterprise, 

(51) Devising a clever and plausible delusion 
in order to forward certain ambitious 
plans, 

(56) Seeking to test the value of a mysterious 
communication and becoming involved 
in weird complexities, 

(57) Seeking to unravel a puzzling complica- 
tion, 

(10) Suffering an estrangement due to mis- 
taken judgment, 

(13) Seeking by craftiness to escape mis- 
fortune, 

(14) Falling into misfortune through the 
wiles of a crafty schemer, 

(21) Falling into misfortune through mis- 
taken judgment, 

(25) Seeking to save a person who is accused 
of transgression, 

(28) Facing a situation in which the mis- 
fortunes of one greatly esteemed call 
for courage and sagacious enterprise, 

(31) Living a lonely, cheerless life and seek- 
ing companionship 

(32) Seeking to conceal identity because of a 
lofty idealism, 

(38) Committing a grievous mistake and 
seeking in secret to live down its evil 
results, 

(39) Forsaking cherished ambitions to carry 
out an obligation, 

(43) Seeking to overcome personal limita- 
tions in carrying out an enterprise, 

(46) Seeking retaliation for a grievous wrong 
that is either real or fancied, 

(47) Finding (apparently) an object greatly 
coveted, and obtaining ^apparently) the 
object, 

(50) Being impelled by an unusual motive to 
engage in crafty enterprise, 

(54) Becoming involved in a puzzling com- 
plication that has to do with an object 
possessing mysterious powers, 

(55) Becoming involved in a mysterious 
complication and seeking to make the 
utmost of a bizarre experience, 

(61) Becoming aware oi an important secret 
that calls for decisive action, 

(62) Becoming involved in any sort of com- 
plication, 

(7) Becoming involved in a love affair that 
encounters unforeseen obstacles, 

(8) Confronting a situation in which wealth 
is made conditional upon a certain 
course of action in a love affair, 

(12) Falling into misfortune through dis- 
loyalty in love, 

(17) Bearing patiently with misfortunes and 
seeking to attain cherished aims honor- 
ably, 

(18) Rebelling against a power that controls 
personal abilities and holds them in sub- 
jection. 

(23) Becoming involved in a complication 

that has to do with mistaken judgment 

and suspicion, 

(27) Refusing to betray another's secret and 

calmly facing persecution because of 

the refusal, 
(30) Enlisting whole-heartedly in the service 

of a needy unfortunate and conferring 

aid of the utmost value, 

(35) Becoming involved in a complication 

that challenges the value of cherished 

ideals, 

(41) Finding an obligation at variance with 
ambition, inclination or necessity, 

(45) Seeking to forward an enterprise and 
encountering family sentiment as an 
obstacle. 

(49) Assuming a fictitious character when 
embarking upon a certain enterprise, 

(52) Encountering a would-be transgressor 
and seeking to prevent a transgression, 

(58) Engaging in an enterprise and then 
mysteriously disappearing, 

(59) Engaging in an enterprise and becoming 
involved with the occuh and the fan- 
tastic. 

15 



Plotto Chart: Masterplols with 



I nterchawjeable Clauses 



''B" Clauses 



'C" Clauses 



(9) Being put to a test in which love will be  

lost if more material fortunes are ad- 
vanced. 

(1) Pays a grim penalty in an unfortunate undertaking, 


(2) Emerges happily from a serious en- 
tanglement. 


(19) Meeting with rnisfortune and being cast 
away in a primitive, isolated and savage 
environment, 

(20) Becoming involved with conditions in 
which misfortune is indicated, 

(24) Becorning the victim of mistaken judg- 
ment in carrying out an enterprise, 



(36) Undergoing an experience that results 
in a remarkable character change, 

(37) Seeking against difficulties to realize a 
cherished ideal. 



(3) Foils a guilty plotter and defeats a 
subtle plot. 



(4) Undertakes a role that leads straight to 
catastrophe. 



(5) Emerges from a trying ordeal with soreiy 
garnered wisdom. 



(6) Makes the supreme sacrifice in carrying 
out an undertaking. 



(7) Reverses certain opinions when their 
fallacy is revealed. 



(42) Falling into misiortune while seeking (8) Achieves a spiritual -"ictory 

honorably to discharge an obligation, 

(9) Achieves success and happiness in a 
hard undertaking. 



(11) Discovers the folly of tr>^ing to appear 
otherwise than as one is in reality. 



(53) Opposing the plans of a crafty schemer, 

(12) Rescues integrity from a serious en- 
tanglement. 



(60) Becoming involved, through curiosity 
aroused by mystery, in a strange enter- 
prise. 



(13) Comes finally to the blank wall of 
enigma. 

(14) Achieves a complete and permanent 
character transformation 



(15) Meets any fate, good or evil. 
